Now to make working with TOTP algorithm and Google Authenticator simpler,
we will use the following library by adding it to our POM file.
Next,
let's add the property to our user entity to persist if the
user requires two-factor authentication.
You also need to store the secret keys for each user.
Now in the demo app, we are using MongoDB,
so we need an Entity object with username,
secret key, and an index on username for efficient lookups.
Let's create an account page where the user can choose
to enable two-factor authentication.
In the AccountController,
we will return if the user has two-factor authentication enabled.
If they don't, we will give them the option to enable it.
The service method simply checks if the enabled flag is set on the user entity.
Then, we will create an endpoint to return the Authenticator QR code URL.
The GoogleAuthenticator class can generate a new secret, which we can persist.
Then you can use the GoogleAuthenticatorQR code generator to
generate a QR code with the secret inside.
By passing in the ISSUER name, this is very important.
This is the name of your application that will be displayed
in the Authenticator app next to the code,
also their account name,
which also appears next to the app name in case the user has multiple
accounts with your site and also the key we pass in.
Now in the account's HTML page, we can display the QR code to the user.
Also, before we enable two- factor authentication for the user,
we want them to confirm the code to ensure that it is set up correctly.
Hence, we also need a confirm endpoint in the controller.
We get the username by adding the Principal field to the method.
Spring will then populate it with the current user.
If the user does not have two-factor authentication configured,
we call our service class to enable it.
We check the code is valid by retrieving the secret key stored for the
user and using the GoogleAuthenticatorAuthorize method.
Now if the code does not match,
we throw a custom InvalidTOTPVerificationCode exception,
which is simply a class that extends the Java RuntimeException.
If the code matches,
then we update the user entity by setting the TotpEnabled flag to true,
as well as the model.
If the user logs in and they have two- factor authentication enabled,
we need to challenge them to provide the two-factor authentication code.
We can set it up so that once a user authenticates with their username,
password, and pin,
they will have restricted access to the site until they also
provide a valid two-factor authentication code.
Now let's also create a TOTP login and login error page,
which simply accepts the code generated from their Authenticator app.
The error page also provides a generic error message when the
code from the previous attempt was not valid.
In the Configuration class,
let's change it from any authenticated request being able to access
their portfolio to only ones that have the role USER.
Now in our UserDetailsService class,
which retrieves the credentials from the identity store,
we can check if the user has two-factor authentication enabled.
If they do, we add the new authority TOTP_AUTH_AUTHORITY,
which will give the user restricted access to the site.
If they don't have two-factor authentication,
then we will give them the user role and give them full access to the site.
In the Configuration class,
we need to give the users with TOTP authentication authority
access to the two-factor authentication login page.
I will go over roles and authorities in detail in the next modules,
but basically, roles are high level, like a user or an admin,
and they generally start with the prefix ROLE_.
And authorities are more fine-grained.
So you can have a user that is assigned different
authorities for different resources, etc.
Now to challenge users that have the TOTP authority,
we could put the verification logic in a controller,
but let's try something different and create a filter to do the authentication.
This is consistent with how Spring does authentication.
The simplest way is to create a class that extends the Spring
GenericFilterBean and override the doFilter method.
First,
let's try to obtain the code from the request and the
Authentication object from the security context.
If the security code is null, the filter will ignore the request,
forwarding it to the next filter in the chain.
Otherwise,
we check if two-factor authentication is required by checking if the
user is authenticated and has the TOTP authority.
If the code is valid, we create a copy of the user's current authorities,
remove the TOTP authority, and add the user role.
We then create a new UsernamePasswordAuthenticationToken as it is immutable,
populate it with the new user authorities,
and set it in the user context, replacing the old one.
We can then redirect the user using the Spring redirectStrategy to the
portfolio page as they are now fully authorized to access this site and
annotate the filter with the Component annotation.
Now to add the filter to the filter chain, we can use the HttpSecurity object.
Now there are many ways to add a filter.
If you don't care about the order,
use the addFilter method or the addFilterBefore or After
method if you want to ensure it is before or after a
certain filter already in the chain.
We will use the addFilterBefore method and configure it so that our
filter is before the UsernamePasswordAuthenticationFilter.
Now one important thing,
if two-factor authentication is enabled and the user
authenticates with their credentials,
we need to redirect them to the two-factor authentication login page.
Hence, in the login filter,
there is a succeessForwardUrl property where we can specify the URL path
to forward the user after successful authentication.
In our case,
there are two options depending on whether the user has
two- factor authentication enabled.
Hence, we need a successHandler instead.
Now to create one,
you need to implement the AuthenticationSuccessHandler interface
and the onAuthenticationSuccess method where you can add the
logic to handle a successful login.
In this case,
we check if the user has two-factor authentication enabled and
redirect them to the appropriate location.
Okay, let's give this a test.
Now as expected, the user is prompted for the code.
If they try to access the portfolio page, they are denied.
Let's change it so that they are redirected back to the code
verification page instead of displaying the error page.
In the Configuration class,
we can access the exceptions filter with the exceptionHandling builder method.
Here you can set the accessDenied page.
In our case though, we need to use the accessDeniedHandler,
which is simply a class that implements the AccessDeniedHandler
interface and implements the handle method.
For our demo application,
we check if the user requires two-factor authentication.
If so, we direct them to the TOTP login page.
Otherwise, we will display a generic error page.
Okay, let's try this again.
We're now redirected back to the code verification page.
And if we enter a valid code, we have access to the site.
Okay,
that was a lot of effort for the user to perform each
time they wish to access the site, a password,
a pin, and optionally two-factor authentication.
Now in the next section,
we will look at improving the user experience using the
Spring Security's Remember me functionality, which will allow the user to remain authenticated between sessions.